---
title: Resume
author: Max Leonard Inden
menu: main
weight: 3
---


## Experience

**Software Engineer at Parity** | July 2019 - Present


**Freelance Network Engineer at SpaceNet AG** | Jun 2019

Work on multiplexed fiber-optic setup and server migration. Wrote Prometheus
exporter to monitor data center power modules via Modbus. Gained insight into
BGP infrastructure.


**Senior Software Engineer at CoreOS / RedHat** | Jan 2017 - May 2019

Systems engineer working on the open source monitoring project **Prometheus**
and its integration with the **Kubernetes** ecosystem to monitor cloud-native
Linux container infrastructures. Designing and implementing distributed systems
on top of the Linux operating system and Kubernetes orchestrator. Presenting
open source work at various IT conferences and champion the Prometheus project
as a core maintainer.


**Software Engineer at Innoscale** | Aug 2014 - Dec 2016

Development of a master data management web application. Involved as a back and
front end JavaScript engineer. Spearheaded the introduction of a full stack
JavaScript testing environment including a continuous integration pipeline to
improve code quality and detect errors early. Coordinated and implemented the
transformation of the UI to ReactJS reducing side effects and code reusability
with a component based approach.  Providing company wide ReactJS workshops to
accelerate the transition.


**Software Engineer / Sales Engineer at Contelligence** | Feb - Jul 2014

Concept creation, development and sales of a Microsoft Office Add-on to support
compliance processes for the enterprise document management in the finance
sector. Responsible for the application software testing. Introduction of a new
human ressource management framework.


**Associate System Support Analyst at DHL IT-Services** | Jul - Sep 2013

Working in the IBM AS400 and Linux operation team.
Development of graphical visualization tool to analyse the operation alert
system of the IBM infrastructure. Creating regular server security reports.
Management of a database for internal license management.


**System Administrator at Heuft Systemtechnik** | Oct - Nov 2009

Supporting the internal IT department in hardware
maintanance, network architecture and software distribution.


## Volunteer & Extracurricular Work

**Tutor and Mentor for Refugee Family** | 2018 - current

Tutoring Math, Physics, English and German. Mentoring and assisting with
authorities.

**Prometheus Core Member** | 2017 - current

Member of the upstream core team of the open source monitoring tool
_Prometheus_, developing and maintaining source code, representing the project
at tech-conferences and helping adoption in user communities.

**Informationsdienst Umweltrecht e.V.** | 2015 - current

Administrator for the non-profit _Informationsdienst Umweltrecht e.V._ for
their online presence.

**(Certified) Ski Instructor** | 2017 - current

**Student Council** | 2013 -2016

Member of the _Fachschaft WiWi_ student council, helping students of the
faculty in their day-to-day student life, taking the role of the Website
Administrator.

**Math, Physics and English Tutor** | 2010 - 2013


## Education


**Bachelor at WWU Münster** | 2013 – 2016

Bachelor of Applied Science (B.A.Sc.) in Information systems at the
Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, combining computer science and
business administration with a special focus on enterprise applications and
architectures. Specialization during bachelor thesis on conception of
datastructure dialects and development of an application for metadata
management.


**Exchange Semester at UIA Kristiansand** | 2015

Participation in the bachelor and master program Information Systems at
Universitetet i Agder with the courses Open Source, development of a mobile
lecture support application, Hands-on-eBusiness for Entrepreneurs, development
of a both mobile and desktop web shop, IT and Management, operational and
strategic management of enterprise information technology, and Consumer
Behaviour, analysis and prediction of psychological, social and cultural
factors that affect consumer behaviour.


**Abitur at Amos Comenius Gymnasium Bonn** | 2004 - 2013


**Exchange year at Lugoff-Elgin High School SC USA** | 2010 - 2011




## Technical Skills

- **Languages**: Go, Ruby, elm, JavaScript (NodeJS, Coffee Script), Java (EE), SQL, MongoDB query
language, Haskell, Shell Scripting, Swift

- **Frameworks & Projects**: Kubernetes, Prometheus, Docker, git, LaTeX

- **Systems**: Linux (Android), Unix, Windows


### Languages

- German (Mothertongue)
- English (Business fluent)




